squat day today. If you saw last week's
video, did my reintroduction back to
squatting, I'd had significant amount of
time off my training, my proper
training, I should say. There was some
comments in there that kind of
questioning why would you take one whole
month off. So, for those who don't know,
I took a month off heavy squatting. I
never really take time off training, but
I had a bunch of things. I was a little
bit sick. I had man flu. I had a week-l
long seminar and a lot of recovery in
between that and just busy time. So
during that time, I didn't get under a
squat bar. Instead, I did leg press,
back extensions, I did RDL's. I didn't
do any super heavy competition lifts. So
that was the context behind that video.
I didn't actually have an entire month
off, which is probably why I was
stronger than I thought. Then based on
that, I'm going to set my new program,
which is the goal is to get back to
where I was before I left off, which was
220 kg for five reps. So today, I'm
going to do 200 kg. But instead of doing
the 1 2 3 4 5, I'm just going to go
straight to my top sets, which is going
to be two sets of five reps on 200 kg.
And yes, that's all. Two sets of five.
I'm going to do some accessory work, but
I'm also going to be talking to you guys
about volume and how much volume you
actually need to progress in both
strength and muscle building. And
sometimes you might hear different
things from different people. Some
people are on team high volume, some
people are on low team low volume. I
kind of see the value in both actually.
Um, but if in my experience whenever I
write programs for people, typically
their response is that my programs are
on the lower volume side of things. I
don't think it's low volume. I think
it's the correct amount of volume and
that's what I'm going to be talking
about. But before I do that, I got to
get my head on because I've got to do
two sets of five at 200 kg. Last week I
did five reps on 180 and it was
comfortable. I don't think it's going to
be so comfortable today. Um I I'm pretty
sure I'll get it, but I need to switch
on for that. So let's warm up.
If you know me, you'll know that that
wasn't my first warm-up set. My first
warm-ups were on a leg press with no
weight on it at all. I did sets of 50
and then I gradually added more and more
weight. Not much more, lots and lots and
lots of reps. And then I came to an
empty barbell. I did two sets of that.
And that was actually my second set of
five with 60 kg. And I'm going to go up
in 20 kg jumps up until I get to 200 kg.
So common question is how do you warm up
for a set of heavy squats? A very very
simple solution is to start with the
barbell unloaded. Do however many reps.
You know, if I was to write out a
program for you, I could say empty
barbell set of 10 or one, not two sets
of 10. And then we go to the first
logical increment, which for me is 60
kg. And I just did two sets of five. So
the idea is to get more volume while the
weight is light. How long am I resting
in between? As long as it takes me to
load the plates. I'm not tired. So it's
kind of like just do the reps and it's
really, really light and it's not
fatiguing. The idea is stimulate, not
annihilate. Okay? So now I'm going to go
up in 20 kg increments, which means I'm
jumping by 10% increments.
Okay? So you know, when you're warming
up to 200 kg, the jumps are going to be
different to if you're warming up to 100
kg. I'd probably go up in 10 kg jumps,
which is the same percentage, 10%
increases up until you get to the top
weight. And the way that we do it is
pyramid that. So while it's light, we do
more repetitions because it's not
fatiguing. And as the weight gets
heavier and heavier, we do less and less
repetitions and take slightly longer
rest periods. So for now, of course, I'm
talking. If you guys weren't here and I
wasn't talking, I would have just gone
in straight away. But then as the weight
gets heavier and heavier. So barbell 20
and then 60 80 100 and then I'll
probably wait an extra minute to get to
120 140 and then wait an extra minute to
get to 160 180 and then I'll probably
give myself about 4 to 5 minutes from my
last warm-up set to my top set which is
200 kg. And then I'll do five reps on
that. And then I'll probably rest 6 to 8
minutes. And I'm only going to do two
sets
80 kg. So, as the weights go heavier,
the reps go lower.
your thoughts about like going on a
treadmill to bike for the
>> I think that's good. You know that's a
different type of a warmup. So your
question was if they didn't hear what
are your thoughts on going on a
treadmill or a bike or something as a
warmup. I think it's good but it's not
specific and some people spend a lot
more time on warm-ups. So, I just told
you a basic warm up, which is to start
with the workout that you're going to be
doing unloaded. So,
then there's the longer approach, which
is what I actually do. I've just spent
the last 10 minutes doing non-specific
work. Well, it's kind of specific. It
was leg press, but non-specific work
would include things like treadmill or
an assault bike or something that's just
going to increase your general
temperature. That's what warming up is.
But that's not enough. So, you can't
just go straight from a run or treadmill
or whatever the cardio exercise to your
top set. That's not going to work. What
you will need to do is general warm-ups,
fantastic. But again, stimulate, don't
annihilate. My recommendation isn't to
have your cardio session before the
weights. That's too fatiguing. So, if
you are going to do cardio, it's very,
very low intensity. And, you know, 5 or
10 minutes, whatever makes you feel
good, but not fatigued. That's
non-specific warm-up. And if it works
for you, that's what you should do. Some
people just like to spend a little bit
more time warming up than others. I'm
one of those, but I don't like to warm
up by doing cardio. I like to warm up by
going like a little bit more specific
than that. So, as I said, come and check
it out. I did leg press. So, you can see
here there's two times 20 kg plates. If
you look close, there's two of them
there. So, that's uh these are the
powerlifting plates. So, I'll tell you
what I did. I did empty set of 50. And
then I put one plate on and I did a set
of 10. And then I another one on the
other side. Another set of 10. Then two
plates on that side and one on that one.
Set of five. And then two plates on a
set of five. From there I came to my
45°ree back extension. Two sets of 20
because of course that strengthens my
lower body. But I wanted something to
warm up my hip extensors a little bit
better. So two sets of 20 there before I
came to the empty barbell. Now that
process took me 10 minutes. Not
fatiguing at all. Like that's super
light. not fatiguing at all. And then I
come in and I do the process that most
people actually start with. Now, here's
the thing. There's a difference between
me and most people that are generally
into the gym, and that is I've been a
powerlifter at a high level for the last
decade, and I was training for more than
10 years before that. Um, you know, at a
decent level, but not like a
powerlifter. So, as a powerlifter, I've
clocked up a fair few miles. My best
squat is 400 kg. And to be able to do
that, you got to put your body under
some extreme stress. Anything in extreme
is not healthy. So, you know, I'm
sitting here and I'm promoting squats
and deadlifts are good for you, but
there's a very big difference between
squats and deadlifts at a competitive or
an extreme level to at a general level.
Most of the people that I talk to want
general health, general longevity and
and uh strength. And that's where it's
absolutely healthy. You're not doing
things like triple body weight squats or
deadlifts. In general, to be able to do
those things, triple body weightight
squats and deadlifts, you got to train
really, really hard. Now, I'll tell you
now, it has had an impact on my body.
That's 20 years of training. 10 years at
a very, very, very high level. There's
no doubt wear and tear. So, it takes me
a lot longer to warm up these days at 44
years old as well. But when I was
younger, I didn't have to warm up for
that long. Airplane. People that, you
know, pull out research on this topic.
How long do you need to warm up? Is it
actually u a very good injury
preventative to do longer warm-ups? And
a lot of the research comes back to it
doesn't really prevent much injury to
spend longer on warm-ups. So therefore,
you're wasting your time with warm-ups.
Now, I consider that to be overly
simplified. The people that are
performing the research are at a
beginner to intermediate level at best.
What I mean by that is usually the best
people they have is up to 3 years of
training experience. you haven't clocked
up enough miles with heavy loads to be
able to, you know, have an opinion
in my opinion, right? So, you know, you
talk to people, if you talk to anyone
that has spent, you know, over a decade
of heavy loading of the spine, they
would probably appreciate a little bit
longer for the warm-ups. So, therefore,
the recommendation is the warm-ups are
always going to be different. If it
suits you to not warm up as long and you
feel good, then that's what you should
do. However, if you need to take a
little bit longer to feel good under a
barbell, don't listen to people that say
warming up is a waste of time. It might
not be for you. In fact, I've worked
with some incredibly strong athletes
that spend more than half an hour of
warming up and doing things like foam
roller, swinging their hips, mobility
drills, cross trainers, and and
treadmills at a very low intensity that
the research would point to and say that
is not beneficial at all. Yet, these are
people that lift at a high level and
they come in and they are lifting more
than triple body weight and sometimes
four times body weight. So, who's
actually wrong? In my opinion, that's
what the answer is. If it helps you to
do a little bit longer warm-ups and it
doesn't interfere with your energy
levels for the session, then that's what
you should do. But either way, watch
this. I've just spent half an hour. Of
course, I'm talking to you guys as well.
But now, I'm just going to do singles
all the way up. I'm warm, but now it's
about getting my nervous system engaged.
That feels really comfortable. It feels
the way that an empty barbell felt on my
first set. And that's something that I
recommend when people say you got to go
by feel, you know, do it intuitively.
The problem with that is people don't
have the experience to know what feels
good and what doesn't feel good.
Something that I go by with everybody is
you need to earn the right to add weight
to the bar. So what does that mean? It
means that if I'm warming up today to
200 kg, this is that's my last set was
50% of what I'm going to. And I won't
just look at it and say it's 50% it's
easy. Just do the set and just rush
through it and go on to the next. It
needs to feel like 50%. It needs to feel
easy. In some occasions, I'll come to
50% of my uh working weight and it'll
feel terrible. And therefore, I haven't
earned the right to add weight to the
bar. I don't just go up just because
that's the process. So, you warm up and
you just keep on going heavier and
heavier. If it doesn't feel good, I just
won't go up. And if that's the case, it
doesn't feel good, I'll repeat that set.
And then I have two options. If it still
doesn't feel good, maybe it's not my
day. I've been known to repeat that same
weight up to three or even four times
before I add weight. And there's many
reasons for that. I've got a lot on my
mind. I work, I run a business, and
people come and talk to me in the middle
of my training. And that puts me off a
little bit. And if that's the case, um,
that makes it so I'm not ready for the
next set. Sometimes
sometimes it's not my day. And if that's
the case, I'll give myself, you know,
one or two opportunities. I'll repeat
the weight one or two times. And if it's
still moving terribly, maybe I'll change
the plan for the day. So if this starts
feeling terrible, I've got the training
experience to know my goal is 200 kg for
two sets of five. But I'm not scared to
walk away if I get to, you know, 140 or
160 or 180, the last warm-up set, and I
say, "It's just feeling terrible today.
I'm not ready for it." And I've been
known to go home, have a meal, have a
rest, get some work done, and come back
later on in the day, and I feel better
for whatever reason it might be. So,
that's um, you know, my take on warm-ups
is earn the right to add weight to the
bar. All right, 120, one rep.
I always record my warm-ups. And when I
say always, always mostly.
Right now, I haven't been recording.
I've got that set up.
You know, I'm sidetracked. I'm making a
YouTube video for you guys. But if I
wasn't, I would be warming up and
recording all of the warm-up sets
because
I've got something that I'll always say
is perfection is impossible, but it
doesn't mean you shouldn't work towards
it. I'm looking at myself the way that I
move and making sure that I am moving
well. Sometimes my knees might knock in.
Sometimes I'm looking in the wrong spot.
Sometimes my feet are doing the wrong
thing or or there might be an error with
anything that I'm doing and I'll work
towards correcting it so that hopefully
by the time I get to the top set, I'm
ready to go. Now, here's the next thing.
How you feel is a lie. I learned that
from John Bros. And it's very true
because sometimes I'll do a warm-up set
and it feels terrible. And then I go
back to the recording and it tells me
something very different. And that's
been a very powerful tool as a coach
when I'm warming people up, when I'm
training with other people, I'm
recording their sets and sometimes they
say the same thing. They say it feels
slow or it feels hard and I'll replay
the video back to them. Man, there's a
lot of airplanes today. And I'll replay
the video back to them and show them for
themselves. So, this is one of my
favorite tools as a coach. Instead of
telling somebody how it looked, you just
record it and show them.
recording.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Look at this. 45° front or
behind. So, some people face a wall when
they squat and they record. So, this is
me as a coach. Whenever I'm queuing
somebody, I want to see front and side
view. So, if it's completely front on,
it's a two-dimensional image and I can't
see what their torso is doing very well.
I can see their hips opening up, which
is good. Same with side view. I can see
what their torso is doing, but I can't
see what their hips are doing. So, a 45
degree angle from roughly hip height.
So, look at my tripod that's set up at
hip height. Right now, if you don't have
a tripod, it's fine. Rest it up against,
you know, a water bottle like that up on
the bench. That's fine. But don't do it
from the floor. Some people record from
the floor because they don't have the
equipment and the image is too skewed.
Let's go. 140 for one.
feels good. Few things that I do as the
weight gets heavier and heavier. I'll
show you my equipment. Actually, check
this belt out. This is from Pioneer.
This is my favorite belt by far. And
this is a I don't know what they call
this lever. It's not Pioneer cut, it's
whatever. It's something from Pioneer.
But have a look at that. There's
multiple notches. And what I do when I'm
warming up is I start on the loosest
one. And as it gets heavier and heavier,
I go tighter and tighter. And then on my
top set, I finish on the tightest. So
that's one thing that I do to gradually
increase tension uh as I'm getting
warmer. So right now I'm kind of in the
middle. The next thing I do is my grip.
So I know a lot of you ask me all the
time, why do you hold the bar so wide?
Aren't you supposed to hold it close?
Because that's one of the things that I
teach is to hold the barbell as close as
your shoulder mobility allows. My
shoulders are extremely immobile. I've
been a naughty boy and I haven't worked
on my mobility. Mainly because I haven't
really needed to as a powerlifter. I
don't need extraordinarily mobile
shoulders, but I also have a very good
bench press. So, how good? My best is
250 kg. And as a result of that,
hypertrophy occurs and thickening
occurs. And that's all the adaptations.
And it's not just thickening and
strengthening of the muscles, it's also
the connective tissue that surrounds the
joint. And so that's uh part of the
adaptations of being able to lift that
heavy. Now, I'm not saying that you lose
mobility automatically by strengthening
your body. You lose mobility by not
practicing your mobility. So, it would
have been a lot better had I worked on
my mobility at the same time because
that's what you can absolutely do. Use
it or lose it. So, I've lost it when I'm
holding the barbell. If you have a look,
I've been holding it with my hands kind
of like collar to collar. So that's
where I've been holding it on the inside
of the plate. But now what I want to try
and do is squeeze my hand in. So this
will be very very tight. This next set
I'll be squeezing my hand in so that I
have this is called a talon grip. So
this is where it's I'm not holding it
with a full fist. I'm holding it getting
rid of the pinky. And when you get rid
of the pinky, it allows you to angle
your wrist in a way that allows for
better shoulder mobility. So that's an
alternative for people that have poor
shoulder mobility. Instead of trying to
grab it with a full fist, try a talon
grip. So that's that's what my next set
is going to be. Click on the recorder.
And that's going to feel tighter on my
shoulders. And I've always done that
even when I had better shoulder
mobility. I would start with my hands
out wider and then every set bring my
hands in closer and closer and that
increases the tension on my upper back.
And if you understand how to increase
tension in your upper back like that,
which is holding the bar as close as
shoulder mobility allows, combining that
with elbows back and down, when I pull
the elbows back, it engages my midback
muscles and stops my upper back from
rounding under the heavy load. So it
maintains the rigidity of my thoracic
spine, or in other words, my upper back.
So if you fail your squats by breaking
form in the upper back, you need to
squeeze your shoulder blades together or
pull your elbows back. Now, don't do
that Q in absence of the next Q, which
is elbows down or think about increasing
the distance between your shoulders and
your ears. So, some people pull their
elbows back and they're shrugging. And
what happens then is you get this
technique because you've lost your lats
contraction. Now, I want lats
contraction. I want midback for upper
back and then lats for lower back. So,
it's a combination of those two cues
with holding the bar as close as your
shoulder mobility allows. Combine those
three. hands close, elbows back and
down. That's where you get an extremely
strong upper back brace that's arguably
stronger than the breath hold. So, a lot
of people think that bracing in a squat
is just about bracing your core and
taking a big breath and pushing into the
belt. Yeah, of course that's part of it,
but in my opinion, that belt brace and
and breath hold and pushing your belly
into the belt, that's one part of the
brace. Upper back is another part of the
brace. Which one's stronger? I believe
upper back is stronger, but what's even
stronger is combining the two. Watch how
I combine the two.
Very tight on my shoulders. Very tight
on my shoulders. But the shoulders warm
up every set. So, I doubt that I'll get
it in closer, but it'll be a little bit
more comfortable. You know, when I get
into my squats a little bit more and I'm
going heavier, it goes closer and closer
and closer. And actually, in
competition, I hold the bar about here.
So, it's like thumb to that line there.
So, if ever you've seen me doing my big
squats in the last few years, that's
where I'm holding the bar. So, right
now, my shoulder mobility is a lot
tighter. But, you know, that's me going
over 300 kg.
My best squat in competition is 375. My
best squat in training is 400 kg. So,
there's a lot more warming up. And I get
closer and closer and closer and closer
every single set. And trust me, it makes
a huge difference. When I see people
grabbing the barbell wide on the first
set and then every warm-up set they stay
the same, I look at it as it's an it's a
disadvantage. That means you're a lot
looser. You're a lot warmer. And now
you've lost a little bit of that brace.
So, if that's you, that's a take-home
tip that you can use immediately. Every
set that you do, you're warming up a
little bit more. Work towards bringing
your hands slightly closer every set.
And by the time you're on your top set,
the hands should be closer than than
when you started warming up. And that if
that's not you, then I think that you're
missing out on a little bit of extra
strength that you get from upper back
tension.
Next set is 200. And it's feeling I mean
it's always hard. That's the thing.
Feels hard, but then that's something
that I love about the video. I mean I
don't need the video. I felt that just
kind of like the hard part was walking
it out. It's like oh this is heavy in my
back. Tension tension tension and it
came up easily. So, I was like, it's a
nice little surprise. That felt easier
than I'd
anticipated. Yeah. Compared to last
week, the first 180 that I did last
week, um, felt a lot harder than that.
That felt like I could have done a set
of 10 right there, which is good sign
because that's what I need to be able to
do to be able to get a set of five on
200.
So, now
it's still it's going to be hard. I need
to focus for this. I need to switch on
and I want 200 for five and I want it to
not be hard 200 for five. Remember what
my goal is. My goal is in a couple of
weeks to be at 220 for five, which is
back where I left off last time, you
know, a month ago. So for me, it's not
just about doing 200 for 5 today. It's
about doing it comfortably today to give
me the confidence that next week I can
do 210 for five and then the week after
back to where I was 220 for 5.
had a lighter body weight. I'm roughly
97 kg at the moment.
Yes.
Good set, Bass. Hey, good set, Bass.
Oh, thanks, bro. Thanks, bro.
You know,
although
I'm not as strong as I have been, I'm
very happy that that was comfortable. So
to be able to get 200 for five after
last week, 180 for five was, you know, I
don't want to say it was hard, but it
was tough. I had to work for it. That
didn't feel harder. I just jumped by 20
kg and it didn't feel harder.
My body weight stayed the same.
my workload stayed the same, but that's
the power of reintroducing yourself to a
session gradually.
So, I didn't pack on more muscle from
last week to this week. No one puts on
muscle within a week of training.
However, there's a lot to improvements
from week to week. And a large part of
those improvements are picking the right
intensity and coming in on week one of
any new program conservatively
doing this session with more repetitions
in reserve. So you can get an
understanding of how it's going to feel
without taking the movement to fail. And
that gives you the room to be able to
progress the following week. As well as
the confidence. I walked out of last
week's 180 for 5 going, "Yeah, I could
have done 200 today." So I came in today
just without question just going, I know
I can do 200. But what I didn't know it
was going to be that comfortable. So
that's where my pleasant surprise is.
Now, as I do, I'm going to be watching
back to see
depth is correct.
Position's good. Look at how I lock my
eyes on one spot, which is straight
ahead because the body follows the eyes
from start to finish. And that's a
discipline thing as well, because as it
gets as you get more and more fatigued
when you're training, it's like, "Oh,
this is hard." You know, you start to
fidget, your arms might move, and your
eyes can wander around. and that's not
doing you any favors. So that's
something that I teach a lot of people
is lock on. Just be disciplined and just
do not move. If there is a movement
that's happening and it's not your knees
and your hips, it's not helping you. So
don't move. Don't even move your head.
Don't move your hands mid set. Don't
move your back. Don't move anything.
Keep everything rigid and tight. It's
only one set. Hold tight and then you
can move when you're finished. So that
set did all the right things. One more
set. That's all I need. And some of you
at home say, "Why only two sets?" And
that's what I want to talk about is
training volume, especially as you get
better. You don't actually need more
sets than that. Okay? So, the way that I
like to think about it is this. When
you're a beginner, you don't have the
work capacity to do as much volume as
what a lot of people do when they get a
little bit better. So, as a beginner,
you only need to do a little bit of
training. So, what if I was working with
an absolute beginner that wanted the
best results, I'd say all you need is
two to three sessions per week, and
those sessions would last 30 to 40
minutes, and that's it. That's all you
need. Doing more than that, of course
you can. But actually, you can get great
results as a beginner with just that two
to three sessions a week, whole body
sessions. But then as you start
advancing now, you can advance really
quick as a beginner. So that beginner
phase might only last a month, like
literally one phase of that, two to
three sessions a week, and then you can
start upping the volume. Your strength
will increase by a ton. This is called
newbie gains. Your strength will
increase, your work capacity will
increase. And something that I talk a
lot about is your pain tolerance. Not
injury pain, but the pain that you
experience when you work hard. Because
working hard hurts, not an injury kind
of way. You know what I'm saying? If
you've ever taken a set of legs to fail,
like on a leg press or even a squat,
it's like, uh, that's really hard,
right? A beginner doesn't have that pain
tolerance to be able to handle those
things. So that's what you're building.
Then as you become more intermediate,
you can start ramping up that volume. So
you can start doing things like, you
know, four to five sessions per week and
increase the duration of those sessions
to an hour to an hour and a half if you
want. You don't have to. This is where
volume really works well is introducing
more and more volume as we go from
beginner to intermediate and even from
intermediate to kind of advance. But
this is where a lot of people get stuck
and this is who I work a lot with. Most
of the people that I work with are
actually stronger than me, which I brag
about. It's like that's the goal of a
coach, right? Is to get people strong.
How strong? Strong as you can. So that
means, you know, stronger than stronger
than the coach. Obviously, I'd coach the
world's strongest man. He's way stronger
than me and stronger than everyone. But
same with so many members of my team.
I'm the small guy. I'm 100 kg and I've
got very strong lifts across the board.
But the people that I work with are
stronger than me. All right? So, that's
something I teach people. If you're a
personal trainer, when I'm doing
seminars, I I say, "Hands up. If you
coach people that are stronger than you,
and if you're a personal trainer and
you're watching this, I'm asking you. A
lot of trainers don't put their hand up.
If you can say that, then you're a great
coach. If you train people that are
better than you, you're a great coach,
especially if you're at a high level
yourself. Not if you're like someone you
don't train, then everyone's better than
you. Do you know what I'm saying? Or
stronger than you, I should say. Uh, but
either way, so how am I able to achieve
that? I've got a lot of experience with
working with high level athletes at the
highest level, so elite level. And
that's one of the biggest things that I
see with volume is people consider their
best programs, the best results that
they had in their lives, which is, you
know, when they did tons and tons of
volume in whatever phase that took them
from intermediate to advanced, right?
Lots of volume tooken there. And now
they're at advance and they come to me.
I get a lot of people that come to me
and already advanced. So people that
come to me that can already bench press
over 200 kg, squat over 300 and even
over 400 kg. Those people come to me and
quite often they've plateaued and it's
like why have I plateaued? Often, but
not always, but very very often. I look
at what they're doing and they're trying
to do the same thing that took them from
intermediate to advanced and use that
same thing to get them from advanced to
elite. There's a very big difference to
who you are now. You are a lot stronger.
you have a much better ability to
contract more forcefully, lift a heavier
weight, and therefore your sessions rep
by rep are harder and take longer to
recover from. So, back in the day when
you're intermediate to advanced, doing
things like whatever the recommendation
is, 10 to 20 sets per body part per
week, worked really well. But right now,
you're too strong for that. 10 to 20
sets per body part per week for advanced
lifters is too much. So therefore, when
you start low volume as you progress,
increase the volume. As you progress,
you are increasing something. You're
increasing the intensity. You're
increasing the load. And that's what
needs to be factored in when you're
calculating your reps and total sets.
And that's where you need to start
thinking about reducing your total sets.
So for me, two top sets here is good.
I've rested for long enough. Of course,
I'm going to do a little bit more work
that's less demanding after my two top
sets, but doing more isn't necessarily
better. The terminology is beating a
dead horse. Okay, now got to switch on
one more set. Did you like that song?
D's Faith by Limp Biscuit. I like Limp
Biscuit. I'm going to stick to Limp
Biscuit. That worked.
I don't know this song. Nookie it's
called. No, I need Familiar. I need
Familiar.
Let's go.
I feel like I'm cheating on myself.
That was just too easy. Don't you think?
>> That was good, man.
That was good. Now, here's the thing.
You know, a lot of people say, "Why
don't you just go heavier? I will next
week. Do you know what I'm saying? Like
last week I did 180 on as easy. Was it
too easy? Well, I've been there, done
that. It's like, yeah, it was too easy,
but who cares? Have a little bit of
patience, son. Come in next week and do
it. So, when I was setting up the
program last week, I was thinking, okay,
I did 180 for five. All right, cool. Set
myself up so I can do 190 for five and
go up by 10 kg jumps. But
it was very easy. So, what did I do? I
didn't go up by 10, I went up by 20. So
I went up to 200 kg. So now I did 2x5 on
200. And guess what? That was too easy.
So what does that mean that I get to do?
Did I record?
I didn't record.
You recorded. And I know I got it. And I
That was easy, but that was the right
headsp space, right? It was also the
right song. That was the right song,
don't you reckon? Like, you know, I came
into that set and I was like, damn it,
I'm talking too much and I I don't want
to switch off. And then I was like,
okay, you know, this is something I like
about my psychup music is familiarity.
Did you see what I did before that?
Like, I had another song on. I'm like, I
don't know what that is. I've not heard
it before. I don't know how I'm going to
feel emotionally. So, sometimes they're
just triggers. Now, that one, I do a lot
of good stuff to that song. So, the
familiarity of that is kind of like
boom, familiar space. I know what to do
when that song comes on and that is
switch on lift that [__] Yeah. So
anyway, back to volume. So two sets of
five. Now that doesn't mean I stop
there. I'm going to continue working and
let's talk about optimal amount of
volume when it comes to hypertrophy. A
lot of the research. So there's a big
war on science-based training at the
moment. I've never been at war with any
of it. I think science helps, but I'll
always look at the science and take it
with a grain of salt and say, "Okay,
that's what the evidence is saying."
However, you know, let's have a look at
the full context. Who are the
participants of this research? They're
often beginners to intermediate. I'm a
little bit more than intermediate. So
therefore, does that relate to me? How
long did that study last? It was 8 weeks
usually because that's how long
university semester goes for. So that's
how long the study goes for. How much
muscle or strength can you build in 8
weeks? The answer is very, very, very
little. But it doesn't mean I throw that
research out. But either way, a lot of
the best researchers say things like
when it comes to hypertrophy, the
optimal amount of volume is 10 to 20
sets per week, per body part per week.
Now, here's the next thing. That's
hypertrophy. There's a very big
difference between hypertrophy training
and strength training. Biggest
difference is how much weight you're
lifting. Now, the higher the loads per
unit, the higher the demands, the higher
the fatigue, the higher the need for
recovery. Simple, right? So, when you're
lifting light weights, it's not as
fatiguing. Yes, you can do more volume
and that contributes the accumulation of
volume contributes to your fatigue.
However, as you get heavier and heavier,
you need to start reducing the volume.
So, when it comes to strength, you need
to lift heavy. Strength is a skill and
you need to practice that skill. You
need to be going kind of the optimal
intensity for strength training is 80%
of your max and upwards is what you need
to be working with when it comes to
building strength. The next thing is
when it comes to strength training, you
don't really want to take big movements
like that to fail because strength is a
skill. And when you want to build
strength, a lot of the research points
to leaving repetitions in reserve and
kind of like not grinding out as you
would as a bodybuilder is superior to
overall strength building. But when it
comes to hypertrophy, the goal is to
work towards that point where the bar is
slowing down and you're grinding out
reps because that's where we're creating
more tension on the muscle. Two
different goals. And this is where we
got the science community and all the
authorities in the space saying you
should train this way and no you
shouldn't. You should train that way.
It's like well you got to add the
context. What's the goal? Let me clarify
a few things. If the goal is
hypertrophy, it's really beneficial to
take those sets to a close proximity to
failure and even to failure and even you
know intensifying sets which I don't
typically do like drop sets and and all
those. I typically don't do that but
that's a hypertrophy stimulus. Don't do
that when the goal is strength. When the
goal is strength, you want to kind of
like start thinking about stopping the
set when the bar speed starts slowing
down. You want quality of movement
because strength is a skill. So, this is
what I do is I take a little bit of both
because everyone wants to build muscle
as well as strength. They complement
each other, right? Now, here's the
thing. If you're thinking about muscle
hypertrophy and taking movements to
fail, you want to think about the choice
of exercises to do that. I wouldn't
recommend taking a big heavy free weight
squats and deadlifts and bench presses
to fail with the objective of building
muscle. When you start failing heavy
sets like that with free weights, that's
where you run a risk of technical
breakdown and if you get strong enough,
potential injury. So therefore, when it
comes to muscle hypertrophy, one of the
best things that you can do is stabilize
your body in a way that if you do start
failing or slowing down your
repetitions, your technique isn't
compromised and you're not going to risk
injury. So choice of exercises matters
depending on your goal. So this is what
I like to do the start of my session. A
lot of people do this. This is called
power building. And power building isn't
anything new. It's kind of like a new
name that people invented, but it's kind
of been done forever. That's like how
Arnold Schwarzenegger used to train, but
he never called it power building.
That's just called training for getting
stronger and building muscle. And that's
how most people train. So that's how I
train. First exercise of the day,
strength building exercises. I'm a
powerlifter. I work towards specificity
and I want to build the skill of those
barbell exercises. Secondary exercises
of the day. I don't want to keep doing
more of the same thing. That's too damn
fatiguing. So, what I want to do is
reduce the intensity of the next
exercises and start thinking about how I
can add exercises that's going to
contribute to my strength. So, this is
where I work towards. The first sessions
are strength building exercises. The
second sessions are muscle building
focus. It's less fatiguing. So, I'll go
to something like a leg press and I'll
probably take this to a closer proximity
to failure where it is safer to do so.
So, this is where I'll do my first sets.
May as well get a feel for this. So,
this is very very light. First exercise,
I think I meant that when I said first
session, second session, first exercise
of the day. That's what I meant. First
exercise of the day for me as a strength
athlete is more in line with strength.
But that's very fatiguing. So, I don't
want to keep on doing more of those
strength exercises. It's too fatiguing.
I won't be able to recover from that.
So, I only do a couple of sets. I'm not
saying two is all you need, but maybe it
is. Maybe two is all you need. But now,
my secondary exercises, what are what's
my criteria for choosing my secondary
exercises? The criteria is less
demanding, right? I choose something
that's far less demanding because you
don't just get harder and harder and
harder. you want to get easy because I
got less energy now. Now, here's the
next thing that I like to consider with
secondary exercises is avoiding exercise
redundancy is what you want to avoid.
So, what does that mean? That means I
just did a squat which is very hip
dominant. So, I've got a flat sold shoe
and I'm working towards using my
strongest structures which is my hips.
My knees don't bend as much on on the
low bar squat, but my hips bend a lot
because that's what I want to use when
I'm doing my heaviest movement patterns
is my strongest structure, which is my
hips. So, the low bar squat is hip
dominant. So, the last thing I want to
do is do more hip dominant accessory
work. I've already done that. So, how do
I avoid exercise redundancy? By choosing
an exercise that complements what you
did by targeting the joint angles and
ranges of motion that you neglected in
the main movement. So that first
exercise of the day and this is how you
at home can structure your squat
sessions or your lower body sessions.
Two different squat patterns, hip
dominant and knee dominant. When I say
squat pattern, I don't just mean barbell
squatting. The leg press, the lunge,
they all fall within the squat patterns.
And there is a hip dominant version and
a knee dominant version. I'm going to
show you the hip dominant version of the
leg press, which is not what I'm going
to do today because I want to avoid
exercise redundancy. So the hip dominant
version is exactly the same stance that
I just did that low bar squat in. I
don't need to do more of that because
I've just done that. So, what I want to
do is target the things that I haven't
done. And the way that I change my
stance and body position is I bring my
feet closer and lower and position my
body in a way that I'm pushing through
the balls of my feet. And that allows
for a full knee bend. How do I know it's
a full knee bend? Because the hamstring
is pressing against the calf in the
bottom position.
I love that exercise. Now, what are you
thinking at home? If you haven't seen
that exercise, you're looking at it
going, "Isn't that bad for your knees?"
It can be, but anything can be bad for
any joint if you misload it. The
objective here is to not misload it. How
do you not misload it? Is don't go as
heavy as you can the first time you do
that exercise. It's not the first time
I've done this exercise. I've been doing
these types of squat patterns where I do
divide my session into hip dominant and
knee dominant for ever since I started
training. I was taught how to do knee
dominant hack squats and leg press over
20 years ago by my bodybuilding friends.
So I have been gradually strengthening
that knee joint in the full bend
position like that for my whole training
career. So, I'm not coming in here day
one and going through an extreme full
range of motion in knee joint flexion
under heavy loads and trying to max out
like that. So, if you were trying to do
that, then yeah, it can be dangerous for
your knees, but that's not what I've
done. And if it's a movement or a range
of motion you've not done in your life,
don't start heavy. Start light and
gradually progress. And that's how not
only is it not bad for your knees, but
actually that's how you build
strong knees.
See, this doesn't look heavy cuz the
plates are so thin. I'm going to do
that.
Does that look heavier?
Now, look at it. You can see there's
You can see there's more plates. Look
how many plates I've got. Habibi.
>> Yeah, that looks
>> Thanks, bro. Yeah, it's cuz I'm strong.
This is still warming up.
Still warming up.
Huh? [__]
Okay.
Okay. So, 20. Do two sets of that. I do
two sets of that. And I'm going to give
myself 8 minutes rest in between those
sets.
And you're going to ask me, why are you
resting so long? Because I believe
quality over quantity. The reason why we
do shorter rest periods is so we can get
more work in. Remember how many sets I'm
doing? Two. I'm getting the work in.
I've got the time to get the work in.
But if I give myself longer to recover,
it's going to be high quality. And it's
not just my legs that I need to recover.
Listen to me breathing heavily. That's a
set of 20. Why so many reps? Because I
don't like the feeling of this when I go
super heavy. The buildup of blood
pressure is really high and I feel a lot
of tension in my head. So, if you heard
me, I was breathing through that. When I
squat, I don't breathe. I hold my breath
down, up, exhale. Big breath, down, up,
exhale. Here, I'm breathing in,
breathing out. Because I want to reduce
the way that your body position is
upside down like that increases your
blood pressure. Combine that with breath
hold. I don't like it. So, that's why I
prefer to do higher reps because the
goal with muscle hypertrophy isn't as
much to do with the weight that you're
lifting, but rather the tension you're
creating on the muscle. The tension
you're creating on the muscle can be
achieved through heavy weights closer to
fail or lighter weights closer to fail.
The body can't tell the difference as
long as that's the part that you're
working towards taking it to a close
proximity to failure. That's how you
increase tension on the muscle. Now, the
argument for high reps with muscle
hypertrophy. A lot of people are on the
kind of like the bandwagon of doing a
set of 20 or high reps like this. The
first 15 reps contribute to fatigue. And
it's only the last five reps that were
really effective. So that's called the
effective reps model. The fact is I just
did 20 reps of that. You know, I'm
tired. I can go heavier than that, of
course. But what's it going to feel like
on my body to do five reps or six reps
or less than 10 reps? I'll tell you how
it's going to feel. It's going to feel
like my head's going to explode. My
knees will probably start hurting and my
joints will probably start hurting. So
it's not as if heavy is bad for your
joints, but I think heavy at high
frequency is bad for your joints. for
however many years. That's where wear
and tear occurs. So, this is where my
favorite strategy is to combine high
reps with low reps. High loads with low
loads over the course of your long-term
plan. They complement each other.
Whenever I'm doing phases where it's
lighter loads and higher reps, my joints
thank me for it. They don't feel as bad.
So, this is where it's not saying that
low reps are bad for joints. I think low
reps all the time is bad for joints.
When you're going really, really, really
heavy. How heavy? Well, I'm pretty
strong. 200s for five is me while I'm
weak. Actually, my best set of five raw
is recently it was 260 kg for five reps.
And that's me at 100 kilos body weight.
I used to be I think I've done 280 for
five before when I was heavier. You
know, in knee reps I was able to do uh
330 kg for five with knee wraps. So, I'm
very strong. So, to say that all I need
to do is five reps and less, damn, I
don't want to. That hurts my body to be
lifting that heavy all the damn time.
Sometimes it's good. So, the answer
isn't team low reps or team high reps.
The answer is there are benefits from
using high reps and low loads. And there
are benefits of using high loads and low
reps and they complement each other. So,
we'll do one more set. Here's the next
programming strategy that you need to
consider is training frequency. Okay.
So,
most muscles a lot of people talk about
the optimal frequency. So there's
research that says frequency doesn't
matter as much as total volume performed
in a week. So I've heard people like
Brad Shafeld who's one of the leaders in
the hypertrophy research space. He's
probably the best there is actually.
I've heard him often say, and I don't
want to misquote him, so I could be
wrong, but I don't think I am with this.
I've heard him say with his research,
whether you do, you know, let's just
call it 10 total sets on that muscle
group, whether you do 10 sets once in
that week or split it up and five two
times in that week, when the volume is
equated, the hypertrophy outcomes are
equal. Now a discussion based on that
goes a little bit deeper and says well
if you did 10 sets in one day let's have
a look at the quality of those sets. The
first five sets you've got more energy.
What are the last five sets look like
when you've got less energy compared to
splitting it up. So on one day you do
the first five and then the second day
which is a few days later. You do what
you're going to do the last five but you
do them fresh. So the quality when you
divide it over the week is a lot higher.
So it's like that's makes a lot of sense
to me. So therefore, that's a great
reason why splitting your volume up over
multiple sessions in the week is
superior than doing it all in one
session. Now, here's new information is
how long does your muscles start to
drain when you stop training them? I
don't think that there's an exact answer
for this and I think it's case by case.
Everyone's different. I think the
stronger you are, the longer that
process is. The weaker you are, the more
beginner you are, the less stimulating
your total work is. So therefore, as a
beginner, beginners I often say, can
afford to do more frequency and train
their their muscles, like three, four
sessions per week and recover in time
for the next session. Whereas highest
level lifters, they're so damn strong,
they need a lot more time to recover. So
that's where I don't think that there's
a specific time, but I've heard people
talk about things like roughly about 5
days is what it takes for your muscle to
kind of like fully recover and stop
growing. Now, this is something that I
read off Tony Batgi. He's an amazing
strength coach in Australia and I've
heard him talk about this where muscles
don't maintain. They either grow or
shrink. There's no maintenance period.
So what happens is you got to figure out
how long are they growing for before
they start to shrink. And instead of
letting them shrink, you want to train
them again. So the number that I've
heard him talk about is 5 days between
sessions. So you train it once, you
provide adequate stimulus so that it
responds for the next 5 days before you
come in the next time and apply more
stimulus to the muscle. So therefore,
one of my favorite strategies that I've
been doing for a long time is making
sure my quad day, so this is obviously a
quad focused day is including some
hamstring work. Right? So I'm going to
do some hamstring curls here. That's
something that I've always done. And
then on the flip side on my deadlift
days, so that's my two lower body days
in a week is one is squat focus. swap
focus with posterior chain accessories.
And then the second day is going to be
posterior chain focus. So like a
deadlift day, but I'm going to add some
quadricep accessory. That way we allow
ourselves. So on my second day, I'm
going to do deadlifts first and then I'm
going to do some quad accessories.
Right? So this is where I get my second
session of quad work. But right now I'm
doing my second session of hamstring
work in the way of hamstring curls,
which have a look at my quality of my
session. Squats very fatiguing. Leg
press also very fatiguing. How's my
energy? I'm stuffed. But do I have
enough energy for hamstring curls? Of
course I do. I don't have enough energy
for deadlifts, but that's not what I'm
going to do.
That was warm up set. Now I'll probably
do three sets of eight of hamstring
curls and that's going to be my session.
Good session, huh? One of my drinks for
the session.
This isn't You know what I do with these
bottles of water? I tip it out and I
pour my own water in. So this is my own
tap water that's filtered and I put salt
in there. And this is tea. Peppermint
tea or hang on. Ginger and lemon grass I
think with honey. And that's my workout
fuel fuel for the day. All right.
Work set number one. Are you going to
record it?
All right. Well done. See you, bro.
Click like, subscribe,
and I'll see you next time.